.TH ZENV 1 "2026-05-18" "zenv 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
zenv \- persistent shell variables
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zenv
.I command
.RI [ args... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B zenv
stores key=value pairs in
.I ~/.local/state/zenv/vars.toml
and exports them into every new shell. Install the hook in your rc:
.PP
.RS
.B eval "$(zenv shell-init zsh)"
.RE
.PP
Mutating subcommands emit shell code on stdout; the wrapper function
installed by
.B shell-init
evals it for you.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B shell-init \fIshell\fR
Print shell glue. Supported shells: zsh.
.TP
.B var set \fIname\fR \fIvalue\fR
Persist a variable and emit its export. Name must match
[A-Za-z_][A-Za-z0-9_]*.
.TP
.B var get \fIname\fR
Print a variable's value.
.TP
.B var unset \fIname\fR
Remove a persistent variable; emit unset.
.TP
.B var ls
List persistent variables as NAME=value lines (human-readable, not eval-safe).
.TP
.B reload
Re-sync the current shell with
.IR vars.toml :
unset variables that were removed elsewhere, export current values.
Uses the
.B $_ZENV_LOADED
env var emitted by
.B shell-init
to compute the diff.
.TP
.B version
Print version.
.SH STARTING DIRECTORY
If the persistent variable
.B starting_path
is set,
.B shell-init
emits a
.BR cd (1)
to that directory, guarded by
.BR "[ \(dq$SHLVL\(dq = 1 ]"
so nested shells and subshells are not affected. Set it with:
.PP
.RS
.B zenv var set starting_path "$PWD"
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.local/state/zenv/vars.toml
Persistent variable store. Mode 0600.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B XDG_STATE_HOME
Overrides the default state directory.
Defaults to
.IR ~/.local/state .
.TP
.B _ZENV_LOADED
Space-separated names of variables loaded by
.BR shell-init .
Read by
.B reload
to compute what needs to be unset.
.SH AUTHOR
jt
.SH LICENSE
MIT
